terminatorX INSTALL:
Copyright (C) 1999 - 2003 by Alexander König <alex@lisas.de>
http://terminatorX.cx

Note: As of Version 3.70 you need to have LADSPA installed to compile
terminatorX. To get LADSPA visit http: http://www.ladspa.org

Quickstart:
-----------

	If you want enhanced audio-file support or optimization don't
	"quickstart" but read the rest of this file.

	If you just cant wait any longer try:
	> ./configure
	> make install

Step 1: Configure terminatorX.
------------------------------

	If you want your compiler to optimize the binary, you need to set your
	environment variable CFLAGS to your needs BEFORE you run ./configure.

	for example:
	if use bash: > export CFLAGS="-O2"
	with tcsh:   > setenv CFLAGS "-O2"

	I use CFLAGS="-O3 -mathlon" btw. You'll need to have a
	"athlon-aware" compiler to use that though (gcc > 2.95.?).

	All of the following configure options can be either enabled with
	--enable-option or disabled with --disable-option.

	The configure Options:
	
		Performance Options:
		--------------------
		
		--enable-scheduler
		
		This option is now enabled by default. When run with root 
		privileges terminatorX creates the engine thread with realtime
		scheduling priorities which should result in much better
		playback performance. Since Version 3.73 terminatorX supports
		running suid root. If you install the terminatorX binary suid
		root with the following commands: (with the default install
		you should find the terminatorX binary in /usr/local/bin)
		
		> chown root terminatorX
		> chmod u+s terminatorX
		
		terminatorX will be started with root privileges even when an
		"unprivileged" user runs the binary. terminatorX will then 
		create the engine thread with realtime priority before any files
		are written, any parameters are evaluated or connections to the 
		X11 display are established. Right after that terminatorX will
		drop root privileges, so the actual terminatorX code runs 
		unprivileged.
		
		The problem is, with Linux' pthreads implementation the pthread
		manager thread (that can not be influenced by terminatorX) will 
		still run with root privileges.
		
		So there is a small chance that a malicious attacker could 
		utilize terminatorX to acquire root privileges if installed suid
		root, although it should require quite some effort to create an
		exploit	for that. On the other hand realtime scheduling 
		massively improves the playback performance. So depending on who
		can access your computer you will have to decide for yourself on
		performance vs security. Alternatively you can of course run
		terminatorX as root to achieve realtime scheduling.
						
		File support options:
		---------------------
		
		All of these are enabled by default. Nevertheless the configure
		script checks for the availability of the helper application
		and if it's not found disables support for it. Check the
		terminatorX homepage for links to those apps if you don't have
		them - or check your distribution first, AFAIK all bring these
		tools nowaday.
		
		--enable-mad
		
		This will make terminatorX use the MPEG Audio Decoder library if 
		it's detected. This allows terminatorX to load mp3 files
		significantly faster than with the mpg123 method. Additionally
		terminatorX will find out about the sampling rate of an mp3 file
		and adjust the playback speed accordingly.
		
		--enable-vorbis
		
		This will make terminatorX use the OGG Vobris libraries to load
		OGG files directly. This method has the same advantages over 
		loading through ogg123 as the "mad" method has over loading 
		through mpg123.
		
		--enable-audiofile
		
		This enables the use of libaudiofile on loading audio files.
		The library supports a wide range of common audio file formats
		(eg WAV/AIFF/AU etc) therefor its use highly recommended.
		
		--enable-wav
		
		This enables the builtin wav routines. They load 16Bit/44Khz
		MONO RIFF/WAV files only but they do that significantly faster
		than using sox. If these routines fail and sox support is
		enabled, terminatorX will try to load the file with sox as 
		a fallback. Disable them only if they don't load your files
		correctly.
		
		--enable-sox
		
		This enables sox support. As sox can load nearly any audio file
		it makes sense to use it. You have to have sox installed of 
		course.
		
		--enable-mpg123
		
		This enables mpg123 support. If you want to be able to load mp3
		files keep this option enabled. You have to have mpg123
		installed of course.
		
		--enable-ogg123
		
		With this option you can turn on/off support for Ogg Vorbis
		soundfiles. This requires ogg123 (Version >= 1.0RC2) and
		sox to be installed. 
		
		Other options:
		-------------
		
		--disable-gtk2
		
		If you've got gtk+ V2 installed but you want terminatorX to use
		the old gtk+ V1.2 for some reason, use this switch to disable
		gtk+ V2 code.
		
		--disable-libxml2
		
		If you've got libxml V2 installed but you want terminatorX to 
		use V1 instead, use this to disable libxml V1.

		--enable-debug
		
		This will cause terminatorX to display some debug messages on
		your console. 
		
		Just as an example my configure line is (works with bash only):
		> CFLAGS="-O3 -mathlon" ./configure 

Step 2: Build the binary.
-------------------------

	This one's easy:
	> make
	
Step 3: Install the binary:
---------------------------

	Just as easy:
	> make install
	
	You need root privileges though. If you don't have them simply copy
	the terminatorX-binary (in src/terminatorX) to a directory of your
	choice and run terminatorX form there.	
